# Inside the belly of the beast #

Some time ago I've [indicated](./20120817--1.md) that I will eventually learn C++ and dive into the Qt framework. Just a few weeks ago I've showed my [love for Jolla](./20130527--1.md) and mentioned that learning C++ turned out quite a bit harder as expected. Let's throw in a #jolla2gether for no apparent reason :-)

_Why is that_?

The answer to that is the subject of this blog post.

*Why C++ and Qt?*

At work we have a 99.9% Microsoft environment and thus it makes sense to develop in .NET/C#. And I'd say that this is probably good enough for 95% of all GUI applications. C# is easy to learn, the .NET framework is huge and provides classes and methods for almost any aspect of a Windows machine.

Performance is no problem at all, if it's done right and if we are talking visual tools/programs for desktop or terminalserver. Development is straight forward and many, many tools are available. I even prefer [SharpDevelop](http://www.icsharpcode.net/) over Visual Studio (2012).

Some time ago I've learned Objective-C, so that I could code for Mac and/or iOS. If these two are your primary targets platforms, you probably should learn Objective-C. I'm really not an Apple fanboy but the API and documentation is the best that I've seen so far. And yet it's not perfect, just to make that clear.

C# is Microsoft only (yes, there is something like [Mono](http://www.mono-project.com/Main_Page), but hey - come on - seriously?) and I tend to dislike the politics of Apple.

The next technology I wanted to learn should be more or less platform independent, bring performance on mobile devices and it should have a GUI. Don't get me wrong, I like the command line but I prefer a GUI for daily tasks. Of course one could read his email via _bash_ and _mutt_ but why?

That was the moment I remembered reading about [Qt](http://qt-project.org/) and on first sight this would enable me to develop for Windows, OSX and even many tastes of Linux. There were first signs of iOS support and [Jolla](http://jolla.com/) will have a GUI based on Qt. Go for Qt makes a lot of sense. 

How hard could it be to learn C++?

So the journey started.

If you start learning C++ with Qt together, the first steps are as easy as pie. Qt provides a large framework and the young Padawan can dive in with a small subset of C++. On one hand side that seems to be a good thing, keeping the learning curve flat. Qt has many features that enabled the C++98 developer to achieve things that now are available within C++11. Clean code for day one on is no problem at all. On the other hand this keeps you away from the standard library and the "built-in" features of C++/libstdc++. The ones who learned C++ first and Qt afterwards were probably in a better position because they could see the benefits of using Qt and they knew what feature of the standard library was replaced or complemented by a (feature) richer component. More then eight months later I am still not sure if it was a good decision to learn both together.

*Conclusion*

I've learned a lot in those eight months, discovered so many things I still don't know and want to learn. C++ can (not must) be a complex beast and alone that makes it an interesting science project.

No regrets, still looking forward :-)
