# Model, model on the wall... #

...who is doing QML at all?
Wut? Is he doing drugs? Nope, I was just in the mood for a rhyme like in _wine dine 69_.

Now take that!

Ever expected _that_ rhyme in a technical blog?

As I have written in [Organize your data or stop being all over the map](./20140112--1.md) I am still playing with thoughts about data storage / structure and how to support that with code. But in the spirit of laziness _or code manageability to sound more professional_ it shall be as few code lines as possible.

If you use widgets in Qt, it can be quite easy to use SQL databases. If you use QML with Qt the story gets an aftertaste. Things that were easy before are not anymore. Let's don't keep on ranting and focus on a solution to the problems that ocured.

If you use(d) [`"QAbstractItemModel`](http://qt-project.org/doc/qt-5/qabstractitemmodel.html") you will have come across the [`Qt::ItemDataRole`](http://qt-project.org/doc/qt-5/qt.html#ItemDataRole-enum") enum. When a view requests data from your `QAbstractItemModel`, it simply calls the `data()` method for some `QModelIndex` and a `Qt::ItemDataRole`. The _index_ describes the position of the needed data, e.g. column and row in a table. The _role_ indicate the type of the needed data. `Qt::DisplayRole` will ask for the data that should be shown as text, `Qt::ForegroundRole` will determine the font color needed to draw the data and so on.

Here is a code snippet taken from [http://qt-project.org](http://qt-project.org/doc/qt-5/qsqltablemodel.html).

```cpp
QSqlTableModel *model = new QSqlTableModel(parentObject, database);
model->setTable("employee");
model->setEditStrategy(QSqlTableModel::OnManualSubmit);
model->select();
model->removeColumn(0); // don't show the ID
model->setHeaderData(0, Qt::Horizontal, tr("Name"));
model->setHeaderData(1, Qt::Horizontal, tr("Salary"));
QTableView *view = new QTableView;
// this one liner is enough
view->setModel(model);
view->show();
```

One line of code is enough to tell the view about the model, the rest is done automagically behind the scenes.

h3. A new king in town

With QML the rules (or shall I say roles?) have changed. If you present a `QSqlTableModel` to a QML view via `QQmlContext::setContextProperty`, the result is something like _that's all Greek to me_.

If you write your own C++ classes that should expose data to the QML world, you will face the `Q_PROPERTY` or `Q_INVOKABLE` macro. Those macros provide the glue between both worlds, or in other words: things known to the property system can be reached in the QML world. For whatever reason a `QSqlTableModel` does not build the needed property bindings on its own. Thus the QML world does not know anything about those objects or at least not enough or the C++ world does not know how to respond to _questions_ from the QML side.

The keyword is _roles_ here. Those are the vocabulary that QML uses to squeeze some data out of a C++ object. Since Qt does not do the job for you, we will find a way to do it on our own. The fact that you _have_ to do something on your own is battlesome but does not change the situation in the end. If you want to use any descendants of `QAbstractItemModel`, that's your way to go.

Let's assume you've got a SQLite database with a _persons_ table and _id_, _firstname_, _lastname_ columns. Those shall be presented in a [`ListView`](http://qt-project.org/doc/qt-5.0/qtquick/qml-qtquick2-listview.html) and your C++ model is known to the QML world via `QQmlContext::setContextProperty` by the name _cppPersonsModel_. Somewhere in the delegate for the `ListView` you reach out for this data:

```cpp
cppPersonsModel.firstname
cppPersonsModel.lastname
```

To achieve this the QML side will ask for every `Qt::DisplayRole` in your `QSqlTableModel` by calling `roleNames()`. This returns a `QHash<int, QByteArray>` and is searched for the column names.

Slow please.

Ok,

here once again:

* you have written `cppPersonsModel.firstname` in your QML code
* `roleNames()` is called (only once I guess)
* `QHash<int, QByteArray>` is returned from the C++ model
* `firstname` is looked up in the `QByteArray`
* the matching `int` is the value for the `role` parameter when the model is queried with a call of `data(const QModelIndex & index, int role = Qt::DisplayRole) const`

Thus your model must be able the deliver the role names and must know how to translate the role (name) to the database column. Since Qt5 the `void QAbstractItemModel::setRoleNames ( const QHash<int, QByteArray> & roleNames )` is marked as deprecated and is _protected_. This and the second requirement (translate role into column names) cause that you must subclass `QSqlTableModel` and code the needed features on your own.

_That_ is what I've done as an example and you can look at it on [Github](https://github.com/hardcodes/QSqlTableModel_with_QML_readonly).

The code to use this subclass in the end is as follows:

```cpp
QScopedPointer<ProxyQSqlTableModel> personsModel(new ProxyQSqlTableModel(&app, database));
personsModel->setTable("person");
personsModel->setEditStrategy(QSqlTableModel::OnManualSubmit);
personsModel->select();
// skipped some stuff unrelated to QSqlTableModel 
context->setContextProperty("cppPersonsModel", personsModel.data());
```

As you can see, now it's as easy as with the old widgets. Time for coffee :-)

