# SailfishOS - what's pkg-config?

ou started developing for the Jolla phone, downloaded the [SailfoshOS SDK](https://sailfishos.org) and started coding. After a while you stumble upon `pkg-config`. What's that?

bq. `pkg-config` is a helper tool used when compiling applications and libraries. It helps you insert the correct compiler options on the command line so an application can use `gcc -o test test.cpkg-config --libs --cflags glib-2.0` for instance, rather than hard-coding values on where to find glib (or other libraries). It is language-agnostic, so it can be used for defining the location of documentation tools, for instance.
Cited from [freedesktop.org](http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/pkg-config/).

bq. The primary use of pkg-config is to provide the nec- essary details for compiling and linking a program to a library. This metadata is stored in pkg-config files. These files have the suffix .pc and reside in specific locations known to the pkg-config tool.
Cited from [free desktop.org](http://people.freedesktop.org/~dbn/pkg-config-guide.html).

That being said you find `.pc` files on the SailfishOS MerSDK VM. If you compile for the emulator, it is `/srv/mer/targets/SailfishOS-i486-x86/usr/lib/pkgconfig`
So that means if you want to compile a program that depends on other libraries, there you find the names that you can use in the `PkgConfigBR` section of the `.yaml` file. Of course that does not mean that your app will be accepted in the harbor ;-)
Using `pkg-config` in the shell directly will not provide any useful information. It is used inside the _Scratchbox2_ environment.